demo.adoc, before:

:experimental:
:commandkey: &#8984;
:toc: macro
:source-highlighter: highlight.js

= Java OAuth Demos

This demo shows how to build a Spring Boot app and secure it with OAuth 2.0. Then, it shows how to create resource servers with Quarkus and Micronaut.

**Prerequisites**:

- https://sdkman.io/[Java 17]
- https://github.com/auth0/auth0-cli/releases/tag/v1.0.0-beta.1[Auth0 CLI 1.0.0-beta]+
- https://httpie.org/doc#installation[HTTPie]
- https://auth0.com/signup[Auth0 Account]

toc::[]

== Create a Spring Boot app using Spring Initializr

Use https://start.spring.io/[start.spring.io] to create a new Spring Boot project with OAuth dependencies.

[source,shell]
----
https start.spring.io/starter.tgz \
  dependencies==web,oauth2-client,oauth2-resource-server \
  baseDir==spring-boot \
| tar -xzvf - && cd spring-boot
----

=== Configure Spring Security

. Ensure it starts and you can log in as `user`.
+
[source,shell]
----
./gradlew bootRun
----

. Install the https://github.com/auth0/auth0-cli/releases[Auth0 CLI] and run `auth0 login` to get your domain. 

. Add your Auth0 domain to `application.properties` to configure a resource server.
+
[source,properties]
----
spring.security.oauth2.resourceserver.jwt.issuer-uri=https://<your-auth0-domain>/
----

. Add a `HelloController.java` file with the following code.
+
[source,java]
----
@RestController
class HelloController {

    @GetMapping("/hello")
    public String hello(Principal principal) {
        return "Hello, " + principal.getName() + "!";
    }
}
----

=== Test your Spring Boot Resource Server

. Run the app using Gradle.
+
[source,shell]
----
./gradlew bootRun
----

. Open a new terminal and use HTTPie to test the resource server.
+
[source,shell]
----
http :8080/hello
----
+
You will get a 401 response.

. Create an access token using Auth0's CLI:
+
[source,shell]
----
auth0 test token -a https://<your-auth0-domain>/api/v2/
----

. Set the access token as an environment variable:
+
[source,shell]
----
TOKEN=eyJhbGciOiJSUzI1NiIsInR5cCI6...
----

. Access your resource server using HTTPie:
+
[source,shell]
----
http :8080/hello "Authorization: Bearer $TOKEN"
----

. You should receive a 200 response with a message.

  Hello, auth0|61bcbc76f64d4a0072af8a1d!

. Stop the resource server using kbd:[Ctrl+C].

=== Add OpenID Connect Authentication to Spring Boot

. Create a `SecurityConfiguration.java` file that contains the same defaults as Spring Security.
+
[source,java]
----
@Configuration
public class SecurityConfiguration {

    @Bean
    public SecurityFilterChain filterChain(HttpSecurity http) throws Exception {
        http.authorizeHttpRequests(authz -> authz.anyRequest().authenticated());
        http.oauth2ResourceServer().jwt();
        return http.build();
    }
}
----

. Confirm you can still access the `/hello` endpoint.
+
[source,shell]
----
http :8080/hello "Authorization: Bearer $TOKEN"
----

. Create an OIDC application using the Auth0 CLI.
+
[source,shell]
----
auth0 apps create --reveal-secrets
----
+
- **Name**: `Spring Boot`
- **Type**: Regular Web Application
- **Allowed Callback URLs**: `\http://localhost:8080/login/oauth2/code/auth0`
- **Allowed Logout URLs**: `\http://localhost:8080`

. Update `application.properties` to include these values, removing any previous properties.
+
[source,properties]
----
spring.security.oauth2.client.provider.auth0.issuer-uri=https://<your-auth0-domain>/
spring.security.oauth2.client.registration.auth0.client-id=<client-id>
spring.security.oauth2.client.registration.auth0.client-secret=<client-secret>
spring.security.oauth2.client.registration.auth0.scope=openid,profile,email
auth0.audience=https://<your-auth0-domain>/api/v2/
----

. Modify the `SecurityFilterChain` bean to enable OIDC authentication.
+
[source,java]
----
  @Bean
  public SecurityFilterChain filterChain(HttpSecurity http) throws Exception {
      ...
      http.oauth2Login();
      ...
  }
----

. If you start your app, it'll fail with the following error:
+
[source,shell]
----
Method filterChain in com.example.demo.SecurityConfiguration required a bean of type
  'org.springframework.security.oauth2.jwt.JwtDecoder' that could not be found.
----

. Add a JWT decoder bean that does audience validation.
+
[source,java]
----
@Value("${auth0.audience}")
private String audience;

@Value("${spring.security.oauth2.client.provider.auth0.issuer-uri}")
private String issuer;

@Bean
JwtDecoder jwtDecoder() {
    NimbusJwtDecoder jwtDecoder = JwtDecoders.fromOidcIssuerLocation(issuer);

    OAuth2TokenValidator<Jwt> audienceValidator = new AudienceValidator(audience);
    OAuth2TokenValidator<Jwt> withIssuer = JwtValidators.createDefaultWithIssuer(issuer);
    OAuth2TokenValidator<Jwt> withAudience = new DelegatingOAuth2TokenValidator<>(withIssuer, audienceValidator);

    jwtDecoder.setJwtValidator(withAudience);

    return jwtDecoder;
}
----

. Create an `AudienceValidator` class to validate JWTs.
+
[source,java]
----
class AudienceValidator implements OAuth2TokenValidator<Jwt> {
    private final String audience;

    AudienceValidator(String audience) {
        this.audience = audience;
    }

    public OAuth2TokenValidatorResult validate(Jwt jwt) {
        OAuth2Error error = new OAuth2Error("invalid_token", "The required audience is missing", null);

        if (jwt.getAudience().contains(audience)) {
            return OAuth2TokenValidatorResult.success();
        }
        return OAuth2TokenValidatorResult.failure(error);
    }
}
----

. Add a `HomeController` to display the user's name after they log in.
+
[source,java]
----
@RestController
class HomeController {

    @GetMapping("/")
    public String home(@AuthenticationPrincipal OidcUser user) {
        return "Hello, " + user.getFullName() + "!";
    }
}
----

. Restart the server. Use kbd:[Ctrl+C] to stop it if it's running.
+
[source,shell]
----
./gradlew bootRun
----

. Log in at `http://localhost:8080`.

. Use HTTPie again to confirm your resource server still works.
+
[source,shell]
----
http :8080/hello "Authorization: Bearer $TOKEN"
----

. You can inspect your access token at https://jwt.io[jwt.io].

== Create a Resource Server with Quarkus

. Clone the Okta Quarkus Sample:
+
[source,java]
----
git clone https://github.com/okta-samples/okta-quarkus-sample.git quarkus
----

. Update `application.properties` to update the public key location. Remove all other properties.
+
[source,properties]
----
quarkus.oidc.auth-server-url=https://<your-auth0-domain>
mp.jwt.verify.publickey.location=${quarkus.oidc.auth-server-url}/.well-known/jwks.json
mp.jwt.verify.issuer=${quarkus.oidc.auth-server-url}
----

. Run the app:
+
[source,shell]
----
mvn quarkus:dev
----

. Verify you can access it with an access token.
+
[source,shell]
----
http :8080/hello "Authorization: Bearer $TOKEN"
----

== Create a Resource Server with Micronaut

. Clone the Okta Micronaut Sample:
+
[source,java]
----
git clone https://github.com/okta-samples/okta-micronaut-sample.git micronaut
----

. Update `application.yml` to change the public key location. Remove all other properties.
+
[source,yaml]
----
micronaut.security.token.jwt.enabled: true
micronaut.security.token.jwt.signatures.jwks.auth0.url: https://<your-auth0-domain>/.well-known/jwks.json
----

. Run the app:
+
[source,shell]
----
mvn mn:run
----

. Verify you can access it with an access token.
+
[source,shell]
----
http :8080/hello "Authorization: Bearer $TOKEN"
----

Commit message:

Upgrade to Spring Boot 3.0.6, Micronaut 3.9.1, and Quarkus 3.0.1

demo.adoc, after:

:experimental:
:commandkey: &#8984;
:toc: macro
:source-highlighter: highlight.js

= Java OAuth Demos

This demo shows how to build a Spring Boot app and secure it with OAuth 2.0. Then, it shows how to create resource servers with Quarkus and Micronaut.

**Prerequisites**:

- https://sdkman.io/[Java 17]
- https://github.com/auth0/auth0-cli#installation[Auth0 CLI 1.0.0]+
- https://httpie.org/doc#installation[HTTPie]
- https://auth0.com/signup[Auth0 Account]

toc::[]

== Create a Spring Boot app using Spring Initializr

Use https://start.spring.io/[start.spring.io] to create a new Spring Boot project with OAuth dependencies.

[source,shell]
----
https start.spring.io/starter.tgz \
  dependencies==web,oauth2-client,oauth2-resource-server \
  baseDir==spring-boot \
| tar -xzvf - && cd spring-boot
----

=== Configure Spring Security

. Ensure it starts and you can log in as `user`.
+
[source,shell]
----
./gradlew bootRun
----

. Install the https://github.com/auth0/auth0-cli/releases[Auth0 CLI] and run `auth0 login` to get your domain.

. Add your Auth0 domain to `application.properties` to configure a resource server.
+
[source,properties]
----
spring.security.oauth2.resourceserver.jwt.issuer-uri=https://<your-auth0-domain>/
----

. Add a `HelloController.java` file with the following code.
+
[source,java]
----
@RestController
class HelloController {

    @GetMapping("/hello")
    public String hello(Principal principal) {
        return "Hello, " + principal.getName() + "!";
    }
}
----

=== Test your Spring Boot Resource Server

. Run the app using Gradle.
+
[source,shell]
----
./gradlew bootRun
----

. Open a new terminal and use HTTPie to test the resource server.
+
[source,shell]
----
http :8080/hello
----
+
You will get a 401 response.

. Create an access token using Auth0's CLI:
+
[source,shell]
----
auth0 test token -a https://<your-auth0-domain>/api/v2/
----

. Set the access token as an environment variable:
+
[source,shell]
----
TOKEN=eyJhbGciOiJSUzI1NiIsInR5cCI6...
----

. Access your resource server using HTTPie:
+
[source,shell]
----
http :8080/hello "Authorization: Bearer $TOKEN"
----

. You should receive a 200 response with a message.

  Hello, auth0|61bcbc76f64d4a0072af8a1d!

. Stop the resource server using kbd:[Ctrl+C].

=== Add OpenID Connect Authentication to Spring Boot

. Create a `SecurityConfiguration.java` file that contains the same defaults as Spring Security.
+
[source,java]
----
@Configuration
public class SecurityConfiguration {

    @Bean
    public SecurityFilterChain filterChain(HttpSecurity http) throws Exception {
        http.authorizeHttpRequests(authz -> authz.anyRequest().authenticated());
        http.oauth2ResourceServer().jwt();
        return http.build();
    }
}
----

. Confirm you can still access the `/hello` endpoint.
+
[source,shell]
----
http :8080/hello "Authorization: Bearer $TOKEN"
----

. Create an OIDC application using the Auth0 CLI.
+
[source,shell]
----
auth0 apps create --reveal-secrets
----
+
- **Name**: `Spring Boot`
- **Type**: Regular Web Application
- **Allowed Callback URLs**: `\http://localhost:8080/login/oauth2/code/auth0`
- **Allowed Logout URLs**: `\http://localhost:8080`

. Update `application.properties` to include these values, removing any previous properties.
+
[source,properties]
----
spring.security.oauth2.client.provider.auth0.issuer-uri=https://<your-auth0-domain>/
spring.security.oauth2.client.registration.auth0.client-id=<client-id>
spring.security.oauth2.client.registration.auth0.client-secret=<client-secret>
spring.security.oauth2.client.registration.auth0.scope=openid,profile,email
auth0.audience=https://<your-auth0-domain>/api/v2/
----

. Modify the `SecurityFilterChain` bean to enable OIDC authentication.
+
[source,java]
----
  @Bean
  public SecurityFilterChain filterChain(HttpSecurity http) throws Exception {
      ...
      http.oauth2Login();
      ...
  }
----

. If you start your app, it'll fail with the following error:
+
[source,shell]
----
Method filterChain in com.example.demo.SecurityConfiguration required a bean of type
  'org.springframework.security.oauth2.jwt.JwtDecoder' that could not be found.
----
+
TIP: If you'd rather not create a JWT decoder bean, you can use the https://github.com/okta/okta-spring-boot[Okta Spring Boot starter], which has built-in audience validation.

. Add a JWT decoder bean that does audience validation.
+
[source,java]
----
@Value("${auth0.audience}")
private String audience;

@Value("${spring.security.oauth2.client.provider.auth0.issuer-uri}")
private String issuer;

@Bean
JwtDecoder jwtDecoder() {
    NimbusJwtDecoder jwtDecoder = JwtDecoders.fromOidcIssuerLocation(issuer);

    OAuth2TokenValidator<Jwt> audienceValidator = new AudienceValidator(audience);
    OAuth2TokenValidator<Jwt> withIssuer = JwtValidators.createDefaultWithIssuer(issuer);
    OAuth2TokenValidator<Jwt> withAudience = new DelegatingOAuth2TokenValidator<>(withIssuer, audienceValidator);

    jwtDecoder.setJwtValidator(withAudience);

    return jwtDecoder;
}
----

. Create an `AudienceValidator` class to validate JWTs.
+
[source,java]
----
class AudienceValidator implements OAuth2TokenValidator<Jwt> {
    private final String audience;

    AudienceValidator(String audience) {
        this.audience = audience;
    }

    public OAuth2TokenValidatorResult validate(Jwt jwt) {
        OAuth2Error error = new OAuth2Error("invalid_token", "The required audience is missing", null);

        if (jwt.getAudience().contains(audience)) {
            return OAuth2TokenValidatorResult.success();
        }
        return OAuth2TokenValidatorResult.failure(error);
    }
}
----

. Add a `HomeController` to display the user's name after they log in.
+
[source,java]
----
@RestController
class HomeController {

    @GetMapping("/")
    public String home(@AuthenticationPrincipal OidcUser user) {
        return "Hello, " + user.getFullName() + "!";
    }
}
----

. Restart the server. Use kbd:[Ctrl+C] to stop it if it's running.
+
[source,shell]
----
./gradlew bootRun
----

. Log in at `http://localhost:8080`.

. Use HTTPie again to confirm your resource server still works.
+
[source,shell]
----
http :8080/hello "Authorization: Bearer $TOKEN"
----

. You can inspect your access token at https://jwt.io[jwt.io].

== Create a Resource Server with Quarkus

. Clone the Okta Quarkus Sample:
+
[source,java]
----
git clone https://github.com/okta-samples/okta-quarkus-sample.git quarkus
----

. Update `application.properties` to update the public key location. Remove all other properties.
+
[source,properties]
----
quarkus.oidc.auth-server-url=https://<your-auth0-domain>
mp.jwt.verify.publickey.location=${quarkus.oidc.auth-server-url}/.well-known/jwks.json
mp.jwt.verify.issuer=${quarkus.oidc.auth-server-url}
----

. Run the app:
+
[source,shell]
----
mvn quarkus:dev
----

. Verify you can access it with an access token.
+
[source,shell]
----
http :8080/hello "Authorization: Bearer $TOKEN"
----

== Create a Resource Server with Micronaut

. Clone the Okta Micronaut Sample:
+
[source,java]
----
git clone https://github.com/okta-samples/okta-micronaut-sample.git micronaut
----

. Update `application.yml` to change the public key location. Remove all other properties.
+
[source,yaml]
----
micronaut.security.token.jwt.enabled: true
micronaut.security.token.jwt.signatures.jwks.auth0.url: https://<your-auth0-domain>/.well-known/jwks.json
----

. Run the app:
+
[source,shell]
----
mvn mn:run
----

. Verify you can access it with an access token.
+
[source,shell]
----
http :8080/hello "Authorization: Bearer $TOKEN"
----
